---
title: Basic Authoring
keywords: terraframe, runway, metadata
last_updated: December 21, 2017
tags: [metadata]
summary: "Covers the basics of authoring metadata in Runway"
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
permalink: mydoc_metadata_authoring.html
folder: mydoc
---

## Overview

The most common way to modify the domain model is through Runway's custom XML schema.  This XML allows for developers to intuitively manipulate metadata, which includes creating new metadata definitions, updating and deleting existing definitions, and defining permissions for metadata definitions.  Along these lines the XML is broken up into five major sections: Referencing existing definitions, deleting definitions, creating definitions, updating definitions, and defining permissions.

The XML syntax for creating a new definition and updating an existing definition are (almost) identical.  The <create> tag is used to create a new definition while the <update> tag is used to update existing definitions.  There are a few key differences between creates and updates, however we will go into this later. First let us take a look at creating new definitions.

All metadata files start with this line:

```
<version xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="classpath:com/runwaysdk/resources/xsd/version.xsd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
```

The `version` tag lets us know that we are defining verisoned metadata. The `xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation` attribute is a little complicated, [click here](#classpathNotation) for more information, but in general you can leave it as is. The `xmlns:xsi` attribute defines the XML format for the w3 standard we will be using. You don't need to change this either. 


## The classpath notation {#classpathNotation}

At the top of every schema file you will see this:

```
xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="classpath:com/runwaysdk/resources/xsd/version.xsd"
```

The `xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation` is a standard way in XML to define an XSD schema definition, which we set to our `version.xsd` file. However, `classpath:` is non-standard, and is a concept we created. This allows us to read the XSD schema from the classpath. Our XSD schema file is included within the runway server jar. You can view this file on the web here:

<https://raw.githubusercontent.com/terraframe/Runway-SDK/master/runwaysdk-server/src/main/resources/com/runwaysdk/resources/xsd/version.xsd>

This custom classpath modifier has many advantages when used at runtime, however IDE's like Eclipse cannot read the XSD file to provide auto-complete. You can place this URL into the `xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation` attribute like so:

```
xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/terraframe/Runway-SDK/master/runwaysdk-server/src/main/resources/com/runwaysdk/resources/xsd/version.xsd"
```

As a workaround for development, but when the file is committed you should use the classpath notation.


## File conventions

Metadata is typically stored at the path 'src/main/domain' in the server project. In this directory you will see a list of files with an unusual naming convention. As an example:

```
(0001466352372715)CategoryIconImage.xml
```

The number enclosed within the parenthesis is a timestamp, generated by Runway. We like to put it first because when you view the files alphabetically (as is default in eclipse or a filesystem navigator) the files are ordered by their creation date. The second part, 'CategoryIconImage' is a name that you the developer create to describe the feature or grouping of features that this metadata schema contains. When the schemas are processed by Runway, the timestamp must be isolated from the filename. Runway uses a regex expression to do this. This regex expression can be found in TimestampFile.java, and although your timestamp must be numbers, your description can be alpanumeric characters as well as dashes, underscores, periods and whitespaces.

{% include links.html %}
